---
layout: post
title: Motor Imagery BCI Application -- Exploring Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) Mathematical Understanding
date: 2025-03-28 14:37:00
description: Foundation of ML in BCI Application
tags: math research
categories: exploration
related_posts: false
---


> **Common Spatial Pattern (CSP)** is a widely used spatial filtering algorithm in the field of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), particularly effective for classifying motor imagery paradigms. It is considered one of the benchmark algorithms in this domain.
>
> In BCI classification pipelines, algorithms typically consist of three key components: **feature generation**, **feature selection**, and **classification**.
>
> In recent years, the development of CSP and its variants has slowed down, seemingly reaching a plateau with few major breakthroughs. Nevertheless, the core ideas behind CSP continue to offer valuable insights for the design of BCI algorithms.
>
> This article begins with a derivation of the original CSP algorithm, with a particular focus on how spatial features are generated from EEG data. It aims to elucidate the underlying mathematical principles.


## Spatial filters Generating

Using the CSP algorithm by linearly transforming the EEG meassurement using:

$$
X_{csp}^{(i)} = W^TX^{(i)}
$$

$X^{(i)} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_c \times n_t}$ is the single-trial EEG measurement from  ith trial; $X_{csp}^{(i)} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_c \times n_t}$ denotes $X^{(i)}$ after spatial filtering, $W \in \mathbb{R}^{n_c \times n_c}$ denotes the CSP projection matrix.

How to get the $W$, the key idea is to after the transformation matrix $W$ to yield the feature whose variances are optimal for discriminating 2 classes of EEG measurements. Here is the derivation of how to get $W$ (See figure below)

<div class="row mt-3">
  <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0" style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    {% include figure.liquid 
        loading="eager" 
        path="assets/img/csp_blog.png" 
        class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" 
        zoomable=true 
        style="max-width: 300px;" 
    %}
  </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    CSP FILTERS MAXIMIZE THE VARIANCE OF THE SPATIALLY FILTERED SIGNAL UNDER ONE CONDITION WHILE MINIMIZING IT FOR THE OTHER CONDITION.
</div>

1. Compute covariance of $X^{(i)}_1$  and  $X^{(i)}_2$ (1 and 2 denotes label) which is  $C_1^{(i)} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_c \times n_c}$, $C_2^{(i)} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_c \times n_c}$ 
2. The take average from all trials for the label =1 and 2, then denotes them as $\bar{C_1}$ and $\bar{C_2}$ 
3. Since we want to yield variances to discriminating 2 classes, which equalivalent to each channel data after the transform is irrelevant. 
    
    
    $$
    \begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
    \Lambda_{\text{csp}} &= X_{\text{csp}} X_{\text{csp}}^T \\
    &= (W^T X)(W^T X)^T \\
    &= W^T X X^T W \\
    &= W^T C W
    \end{aligned}
    \tag{1}
    \end{equation}
    $$
    
    
    $\Lambda_{csp}$ should be a dialognal matrix. (covariance of each channel after projection is = 0) and since we want to discriminating two classes, we want one class variance is larger and  the other one smaller. So that we can get a relationship which  $\Lambda_1 + \Lambda_2 = I$, $(\lambda_1 = 1- \lambda_2)$ here $\Lambda_1$ and $\Lambda_2$ correspond to eignvalue decompastion of the  $X_{csp}X_{csp}^T$ of label 1 and 2 data. 
    
4. Now we can get the is trivial to see that:
    
    $$
    
    \begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
    I &= \Lambda_{1}+\Lambda_{2}\\
     &= X_{scp1}X_{scp1}^T + X_{scp2}X_{scp2}^T \\&= W^TX_1X_1^TW+ W^TX_2X_2^TW \\&= W^T\bar{C_1}W + W^T\bar{C_2}W \\
    & = W^T(\bar{C_1}+\bar{C_2})W\\
    &=W^T\bar{C}_cW
    \end{aligned}
    \tag{2}
    \end{equation}
    
    $$
    
    and we can get $W = \bar{C}_cW$

5. Plugin $W = \bar{C}_cW$ into equation (1), we can get the equation below:
    
    $$
    
    \begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
    W^T\bar{C_1}W &= \Lambda_1\\
    \bar{C_1}W &= W\Lambda_1 \\
    \bar{C_1}W &= \bar{C}_cW\Lambda_1 \quad &\text{(Plugin $W = \bar{C}_cW$)} \\
    \bar{C_1}W &= (\bar{C}_1+\bar{C}_2)W\Lambda_1 \quad &\text{($\bar{C}_c=\bar{C}_1+\bar{C}_2$)} \\
    \end{aligned}
    \tag{3}
    \end{equation}
    
    $$


    This equation (3) can be look as $Ax = \lambda Bx$. This type of formulation is known as a **generalized eigenvalue problem**.  Solving generalized eigenvalue problems forms the foundation of traditional spatial filtering methods in the brain-computer interface (BCI) field. Many algorithms in this area can be reformulated into this generalized eigenvalue structure.

    Understand this equation (3) more intuitively, consider this $\Lambda_1$, is the eigenvalue of matrix $(\bar{C}_c)^{-1}\bar{C}_1$ which is the ratio between combine covariance matrix of label 1 and 2 data. The larger the eigenvalue the larger variance of label 1 data and smaller the variance of label 2 data, vice versa.

---
## Selection of spatial filters

Now is easy to compute the $W$, projection matrix/spatial filter. In Matlab is simply 
```matlab
W = eig(C_1,C_1+C_2)
```
In python is
```python
W = numpy.linalg.eig(C_1,C_1+C_2)
```

This is the math formulation of the spital filter, and it's not end it yet - hang on! 

The motivation behind using CSP is to extract features that make it easier to distinguish between two classes. However, generating too many features can be detrimental to model training, as it increases the risk of overfitting. In addition, irrelevant or noisy features can negatively affect the accuracy of the classifier.  

To address this, **feature pruning** becomes essential. Since CSP relies on **eigenvalue decomposition**, it naturally provides a mechanism for feature selection. When the eigenvalues are sorted in descending order, they guide us in identifying the most informative features. Specifically, the largest and smallest eigenvalues correspond to directions where the variance is maximized for one class and minimized for the other.  

By selecting the eigenvectors associated with the largest and smallest eigenvalues, we can construct a **compressed projection matrix** $ W $ that retains the most discriminative spatial features while reducing the risk of overfitting. After applying this projection, we obtain a filtered feature matrix that is well-suited for classification tasks.


>At present, the value of **$ m $** in CSP algorithms is typically chosen based on empirical heuristics—usually selecting **2 to 4** components.  

The final feature is getting from the equation (4) below. Basically do a normalization.

$$
\begin{equation}
\mathbf{v}_{b,i} = \log \left( 
\frac{
\operatorname{diag}\left( \widetilde{\mathbf{W}}_b^\top \mathbf{E}_{b,i} \mathbf{E}_{b,i}^\top \widetilde{\mathbf{W}}_b \right)
}{
\operatorname{tr} \left[ \widetilde{\mathbf{W}}_b^\top \mathbf{E}_{b,i} \mathbf{E}_{b,i}^\top \widetilde{\mathbf{W}}_b \right]
}
\right)
\tag{4}
\end{equation}
$$

$\bar{\mathbf{W}}_b$ represents the first $m$ and the last $m$ columns of $\mathbf{W}_b$;  
$\operatorname{diag}(\cdot)$ returns the diagonal elements of a square matrix;  
$\operatorname{tr}[\cdot]$ returns the sum of the diagonal elements of a square matrix.


---

## Reference
For more details, refer to the [original CSP paper][csp-link].

Some other useful blogs to understand [闲谈之共空间模式（Common Spatial Pattern，CSP)][闲谈之共空间模式], [共空间模式CSP][共空间模式CSP]


[csp-link]: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4408441
[闲谈之共空间模式]: https://www.cnblogs.com/LiuWenChaoNotebook/p/15586679.html
[共空间模式CSP]: https://mrswolf.github.io/common-spatial-pattern/
